# Using Kubernetes Secrets

When you deploy your integration solutions in a Kubernetes environment, you cannot [use secure vault to encrypt secrets](../../../develop/creating-artifacts/encrypting-synapse-passwords) as you do for a VM deployment.

You need to generate Kubernetes secrets for the sensitive data and inject them to the pods in your deployment as environment variables. Follow the steps given below.

## Step 1: Creating the secret

You can generate Kubernetes secrets using the following command on **kubectl**.

```bash
kubectl create secret generic <secret_name> --from-literal=<key>=<value>
```

For example, let's generate a database password:

```bash
kubectl create secret generic db-password --from-literal=password=1234567
```

See the [kubernetes guide](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/) for more information on creating secrets.

## Step 2: Adding the secret to a Pod

You can add the defined secret into your deployment as an environment variable of your container.

The integration artifacts you develop using WSO2 Integration Studio are built into a Docker image from the Kubernetes Exporter project. Therefore, you must update the `integration_cr.yml` file (in your Kubernetes Exporter project) with the secrets you generated by using the following syntax:

```yaml
env:
	- name: PASSWORD
	  valueFrom:
	    secretKeyRef:
	      name: <secret_name>
	      key: <key>
```

For example, let's add the database password as an environment variable to the containers:

```yaml
apiVersion: "integration.wso2.com/v1alpha1"
kind: "Integration"
metadata:
	name: "kubesecrets"
spec:
	replicas: 1
	image: "docker/k8secret:1.0.0"
	env:
		-	name: DB_PASSWORD
			valueFrom:
				secretKeyRef:
					name: db-password
					key: password
```
## Step 3: Using the Kubernetes secrets
Secret can be accessed from the integration artifacts by using the `wso2:vault-lookup` function in the following format.

```bash
wso2:vault-lookup('<alias>', '<type>', '<isEncrypted>')
```

-	`<alias>`: Name of the environment variable specified in the `integraton_cr.yml` file.
- `<type>`: Set this to `ENV`
-	`<isEncrypted>`: Set this to `true` or `false` to specify whether the secret is encrypted.

Given below is a sample synapse configuration with an environment variable lookup.

```xml
<property expression="wso2:vault-lookup('DB_PASSWORD', 'ENV', 'false')" name="secret"/>
```
